The play "At the Bottom" was written by Gorky in 1902 for the troupe of the Moscow Public Art Theater. Already in the very title of the play there is a huge meaning. People who have sunk to the bottom, drowned in impossible dreams, lost everything they possessed, they will never rise from the bottom, will not rush to a new life. The theme of the humiliated and the insulted is not new in Russian literature. Remembering Dostoevsky's heroes, who also "have nowhere else to go." In the works of Gorky and Dostoevsky, an obvious coincidence can be noted: this is the same "dirty" world of outcasts and scum, the world of drunks, thieves, prostitutes and pimps. Only in Gorky, this world is even more cruel, and absolutely close to reality. In this play, the audience saw for the first time an unfamiliar world of outcasts. No one has ever described such a harsh, merciless truth about the life of the social underclass, about their hopeless fate. Under the roof of a flophouse belonging to Mikhail Kostylev, there were people of various character and social status themselves. Each of them is endowed with its own individual features. Here is a worker Tick, dreaming of honest work, and Ashes, eager for a proper life, and an Actor, all absorbed in memories of his former glory, and Nastya, passionately eager for a big, true love. All of them deserve a better fate.
The people living in this flophouse are tragic victims of wrong and cruel orders, in which a person ceases to be a person and is doomed, if not to survival, then to a miserable existence. Gorky does not give a detailed description of the biographies of the heroes of the play, but the little that he tells us about the heroes perfectly conveys the author's intention. In a few words, the tragedy of Anna's life fate is drawn. "I don't remember when I was full," she says. — I've been shaking over every piece of bread... all my life I've been shaking… I've been suffering... All my life I've been walking in rags... all my miserable life..." The worker Tick says about his hopeless share: "There is no work... there is no strength... That's the truth! There is no shelter, there is no shelter! It is necessary to die... That's the truth!"

A person is left to himself, he is not needed in society and society despises him. Having made a mistake once, people risk death, both moral and physical. Under the dark and gloomy arches of the flophouse, among the pitiful and crippled, unhappy and homeless vagabonds, the words about man, about his vocation, about his strength and his beauty sound like a solemn hymn: "Man is the truth! Everything is in man, everything is for man! There is only a man, but everything else is the work of his hands and his brain! Man! That's great! It sounds-proud!" Proud words about what a person should be and what a person can be, even more sharply set off the picture of the real situation of a person that the writer paints.